- Aravind Reddy V
- IMT 2015 524
- aravind.reddy@iiitb.org

Assuming LMS dropped the indentation. Re-indented files: [code-1](./code1.s), [code-2](./code2.s)

Reference: http://infocenter.arm.com/help/index.jsp?topic=/com.arm.doc.dui0379g/dom1361289850039.html

## Answer

Because the conditions below If-then block are not conditional expressions. If an IT instruction is written, the assembler validates the conditions specified in the IT instruction against the conditions in the following instructions.

#### Explanation

In ARM instructions which are 32 bit or 64 bit, we have enough number-space for several instructions. So we are able to afford instructions like `MOVLT`, `MOVGT` in ARM 32 or 64 bit. We can use them to succintly write code without a separate IF block.

But in `thumb` instructions, the instruction length is only 16 bit, and we cannot afford conditional instructions in the limited address space. So the solution to conditional-blocks is a if-then instruction.

Here's how an IT instruction works
```
CMP ....;

ITXXXX condition
Instruction-condition arguments
Instruction-condition arguments
Instruction-condition arguments
Instruction-condition arguments
```
The number of instructions in the block are the number of X in the flag. If X is T, then the corresponding instruction is executed if condition is True. If X is E, then the corresponding instruction is executed if condition is False.

So, the equivalent for this code is
```
if r0 == r1:
   MOV r0, r4
   MOV r1, 7
else:
   MOV r0, r5
   MOV r1, 8
```
in ARM:
```
CMP r0, r1
MOVEQ r0, r4
MOVEQ r1, #7
MOVNE r0, r5
MOVNE r1, #8
```

But in thumb, we don't have MOVEQ and other combined instructions, so we write
```
CMP r0, r1
IFTTEE eq;
	MOV r0, r4
	MOV r1, #7
	MOV r0, r5
	MOV r1, #8
```

So the processor know which instruction is in IF and which is in Else. The way to write this so that it runs on both Thumb and ARM is to Add conditionals to the instructions. Like so
```
CMP r0, r1
IFTTEE eq;
	MOVEQ r0, r4
	MOVEQ r1, #7
	MOVNE r0, r5
	MOVNE r1, #8
```

So when the target is ARM, the assembler uses IFTTEE for validation only. 
And when the target is Thumb, the assembler ignores the conditional part in further instructions. If the IT block is not present, the assembler generates is automatically, but if it is given, then it is used for validation as well.

In code-1, the instructions below IT block are not conditionals, so the assembler validated them and threw an error. But in code-2, the instructions following IT are as the assembler would expect, hence no error.





