# Assignment 3

## 1 - precision

As per IEEE 754 floating point representation, the bit layout is as shown below

#### Single precision - 32 bit
| Sign (S) | Exponent (E) | Mantissa (M) |
|------|----------|----------|
| 1 bit|8 bits     | 23 bits  |

#### Double precision - 64 bit
| Sign (S) | Exponent (E) | Mantissa (M) |
|------|----------|----------|
| 1 bit|11 bits     | 52 bits  |

To convert it to decimal, we use <code>-1<sup>S</sup> x (1 + M) x 2<sup>E - bias</sup></code>

Let's consider <code>1/3 = 0.3333333333333333......</code>
The sign bit doesn't impact the precision and the exponent value doesn't change even in double precision (after removing bias).
But the mantissa part has more bits, so we can encode more number of decimal points, which brings it closer to the actual value of <code>1/3</code>. So the mantissa part is responsible for defining the precision of the number. In this case,


For example, <code>1/3</code> in both the representations is
#### Single precision - 32 bit
| Sign (S) | Exponent (E) | Mantissa (M) |
|------|----------|----------|
| 0    | 01111101 | 01010101010101010101011 |
| +    | 125 | 0.3333334 |

Which converts to <code>1 x (1 + 0.33333337306976304246) x 2<sup>125 - 127</sup> = 0.33333334326</code>

#### Double precision - 64 bit
| Sign (S) | Exponent (E) | Mantissa (M) |
|------|----------|----------|
| 0    | 01111111101 | 0101010101010101010101010101010101010101010101010101 |
| +    | 1021 | 0.33333333333333332222 |

Which converts to <code>1 x (1 + 0.33333333333333332222) x 2<sup>1021 - 1023</sup> = 0.33333333333</code>


As you can see, the sign and exponent bits are same, but the value is closer to the actual value in double precision with more mantissa bits. So the mantissa part is responsible for precision.

Calculated using [this](https://planetcalc.com/862/), [this](http://weitz.de/ieee/), and [this](https://www.google.co.in/search?newwindow=1&rlz=1C5CHFA_enIN821IN821&ei=CebfW43KC8XdvASK3rsI&q=1+x+%281+%2B+0.33333333333333332222%29+x+2%5E%281021+-+1023%29&oq=1+x+%281+%2B+0.33333333333333332222%29+x+2%5E%281021+-+1023%29&gs_l=psy-ab.3...9430.9430.0.9715.1.1.0.0.0.0.107.107.0j1.1.0....0...1c.1.64.psy-ab..0.0.0....0.UAmEQGIsTaY).

## 2 - Subnormal values

In calculating the decimal eqauivalent, we multiply (1 + mantissa) with 2<sup>exponent</sup>.

So ignoring sign, and for a fixed exponent, the minimum number we might end up with is 1 * 2<sup>exponent</sup>. 
And the maximum number possible is (1.999999.....) * 2<sup>exponent</sup>.


Like wise, if we replace the exponent with the minimum possible exponent, we end up with the minimum number representable with that specification. All the numbers smaller than that are unrepresentable with this specification. Such numbers are called subnormal numbers.

For example, in the single-precision system, if we allocate only 3 bits for exponent and all remaining for mantissa, the minimum possible value for exponent would be <code>-4</code>. So the minimum value of a number to be representable would be <code>1 * 2<sup>-4</sup> = 1/16</code>. All the numbers lesser in value than 1/16 are subnormal.

 -3/16 | -2/16 | -1/16 | -1/32 | -1/64 | 0 | 1/64 | 1/32 | 1/16 | 2/16 | 3/16
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
n | n | n | sn | sn | sn | sn | sn | n | n | n


## 3 - rounding off

As we saw from first section, precision is defined by the number of mantissa bits, so some numbers have to be rounded off to be a supported precision or to a nearest supported value. There are 5 methods of rounding off specified:


- **Round to nearest even**: The number is rounded to the nearest possible value. If the number is exactly in the middle of two possible values, the one with even least-significant-igit is preferred. For example, 17.5 is rounded to 18, not 17.  
- **Round to nearest, away from zero**: Similar to the previous, but rounded away from 0. For example, 18.5 is rounded to 19, not 18.  
- **Rounded toward zero**: The float is truncated zero. For example, 17.8, 17.9. 17.2 are rounded to 17.  
- **Rounded toward infinity**: Same, but rounded towards +infinity. For example, -17.5 is rounded to -17.  
- **Rounded toward -infinity**: Same as previous, but rounded towards -infinity. For example, -17.5 is rounded to -18.  